[AUDIO LOGO]
>> My name is Eileen McKusick,
and I'm a health and human
potential researcher.
I started a restaurant with
my family when I was 20,
and I was surrounded
by sugar and stress,
and really ruined my back,
really ruined my health.
And I ended up realizing that
I was much more interested
in natural health and healing
than I was in washing dishes,
even in my own restaurant.
So I went to massage
therapy school
and ended up picking up
a set of tuning forks
for healing, very early
on in my practice,
and started making
discoveries with them.
And my clients would
come back the next week
and they'd say, hey, do that
sound thing on me again.
It got me out of pain, or it
helped me to sleep better,
or I haven't fought
with my spouse all week.
Do that again.
So working on other people
and seeing the benefits
that they were getting, that's
what kept me going with it.
But even as a giver,
I was still suffering
mid-back pain, a
sense of burnout,
a kind of low level angst,
poverty consciousness, debt.
But in 2010, I taught my
first group of students
how to do the method and then
they started working on me.
And through my experience
receiving biofield tuning,
I really healed
all of the things
that I was suffering
and struggling with.
It's been very transformational
for me to help get me
to that place that I set off to
find when I was 18, of health,
of freedom, of comfort in my
own body, abundant mentality,
and all the things that
everybody wants to have
but we can't get to because we
have trauma responses locked
in our body.
We have false beliefs.
We have all kinds of
things that are in the way.
And I discovered that
sound could really
release and digest and
integrate those experiences
and ultimately lead to the
liberation that I was seeking.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Kulreet Chaudhary.
I'm trained as a
neurologist and later
incorporated ayurvedic
medicine into my practice.
But when I started working
with patients with multiple
sclerosis, and
Parkinson's disease,
and all of these
debilitating conditions,
I noticed that even with those
recommendations for health--
like through the supplements,
the diet, through exercise--
that there was still
some realm of healing
that I wasn't able to tap into.
And I couldn't figure out
at first why that was.
It took me a while to figure out
that the piece that was missing
was the sound healing.
And when I brought that
into it, what I saw
was everything else
we did went further.
It gained a kind of potency
that pushed everything
to a completely new
level of healing.
But that was the first time that
I started scratching my head
and really going, wait a
minute, why does this work?
Why does this work on
such a profound level?
And so as I went
deeper and deeper
into this question of
what exactly is sound,
I wasn't really
satisfied with the answer
until I started to go into
the world of quantum physics.
And sound, from
that perspective,
is energy vibrating.
And it's exactly
the way that that's
described from thousands
and thousands of years ago.
And to practice medicine
or any healing tradition
coming from that
fundamental nature,
and applying it to us
as vibratory beings,
is going to be the most powerful
tools available on the planet.
>> My name is John Stuart Reid.
I am an acoustic
physics scientist.
And an event occurred in 1996,
which totally changed my life,
because, well, my
daddy and I had
traveled in Egypt many times.
We were both fascinated by
ancient Egyptian technologies,
particularly.
And this was the first
opportunity that we actually
had of being in
the King's Chamber
of the Great Pyramid all alone.
It's extraordinarily resonant.
And so one particular experiment
that I wanted to conduct
was a cymatics experiment.
For those of you who are
not familiar with cymatics,
it's simply the study
of visible sound.
Whenever you have sound
and you have a membrane,
there has to be what's termed
a cymatic pattern imprinted
onto that membrane.
And so basically,
cymatic patterns
are everywhere around us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HYMN]
>> Anyway, we set up this
really novel experiment to make
visible the resonances in
that granite sarcophagus.
I placed a small speaker there.
And about 20 minutes
into the experiment,
suddenly, on the
surface of the membrane,
came what appeared to be an
ancient Egyptian hieroglyph.
Now, this was an astonishing
moment in my life.
This hieroglyph was
the djed pillar.
Symbolically, it's the
backbone of the God Osiris.
And this cymatic djed
pillar wasn't static.
It was snaking
really dynamically
on the surface of the membrane.
And every time we
changed the frequency,
a new hieroglyph would
appear in the sand.
At the time when this
was all happening,
I couldn't really even think
about how is this possible.
But what happened, which proved
to be a great gift actually,
was that three weeks
before going out
to Egypt for this
research mission,
I quite badly
injured my lower back
and I was in excruciating pain.
I had been to a physiotherapist
a couple of times,
but nothing had really
touched this pain.
Anyway, to cut a
long story short,
about 20 minutes
into this experiment,
I suddenly realized that there
was no pain in my lower back.
The pain had just
completely vanished.
So getting back to
the UK, I immediately
begun research into cymatics,
the study of visible sound.
But also, I've been studying
the biological mechanisms
that underpin sound
therapy and music medicine.
How does sound trigger the
body's healing response
naturally and provide
many benefits to health?
>> I'm Jonathan Goldman.
I have been in the
field of using sound
for health and transformation
for over 40 years.
If you examine the
different tenants
of the different spiritual
traditions on our planet,
you find that they have a
commonality, an understanding
that life, the universe, and
everything was created solely
through the power of the word.
And the Lord said,
"Let there be light."
Sound creating light.
In the beginning was the word.
In the Hindu tradition,
they say Nada Brahma.
The world is sound.
All these different
traditions talk about
sound as being the original
creative force on the planet.
Now, the question is, how
does sound heal and transform?
>> One of the things that really
surprised me when I started
doing my research into sound is
just how much sound healing was
prevalent in all of
the major cultures.
And this, to me,
was really stunning,
because if we all
knew this at one time,
how was it possible that
something so important
was forgotten by almost
the entire planet?
>> A lot of people now recognize
that pyramids in general are
thought of as
resurrection machines.
And so the healing
aspects of sound
for the ancient
Egyptians, research
shows very strongly
that they had
a significant
acoustic knowledge.
And it's sad in
many ways that it
didn't go on to be shared
with the rest of the world.
But here we are in a kind
of new Renaissance now.
>> My name is Dr. Shamini Jain.
I'm the founder and CEO of
the Consciousness and Healing
Initiative.
And as a PhD student and
as a young investigator
of biofield science,
I was always
drawn to the power of sound.
One of the biggest
challenges for me,
both as a student
and a researcher,
in the areas of
mind-body healing
was a fundamental
arm's length pushback
against the
exploration of things
like consciousness and energy.
There is still an overabundance
of what we call materialism
in science, that is
going with the belief
that we are only
our physical bodies
and that it's only physical
medicine that matters.
But in fact, the data
does not support this.
And even the rise of
my field of research--
psychoneuroimmunology--
showed us that our minds,
our emotions, our spirit
have powerful effects
on our health.
And this is where we are with
this field of biofield science.
Now, the biofield
is simply a term
that we use in science to
describe this energetic body
that has been described by
so many Indigenous wisdom
traditions across the world.
And the physical body
and the energetic body
are not separate.
They are actually connected.
This is really the bridge
for us to understand
how consciousness itself can
affect the healing process.
And we study the
biofield in many ways.
One of the ways that we
study it is through sound.
These days, many of us
are going to sound baths.
We may go to gong immersions.
We may go to Tibetan
bowl healing.
We may practice mantra.
So how do we understand
that scientifically?
I believe that we need
to look at the whole
of biofield science to help us
understand what the power is
of sound for healing.
>> This whole division between
science and spirituality is
kind of unique to
Western culture.
But it's very simple.
The energy and energy
medicine is electricity
where our body has
an electrical system
that we aren't told about.
It's sort of a
situation of not seeing
the forest for the trees.
Because most people understand
that their brainwaves are
electric, that their heart
is electrically driven,
that their blood
carries a charge.
And what this all
points to is the fact
that we have electric
current running through us.
And anything that has an
electric current running
through it has a
magnetic field around it.
And it's much more
elegant and efficient
to work at the level of the
electrical system in the field
than it is to try to
do it in the body.
The field is causative.
And the body gets built on
the blueprint of the field.
So whatever is going
on in the field
is going to be going
on in the body,
especially as we get older.
This idea that our biography
becomes our biology
because it's all written
in our field and our field
is informing our body.
So I'm waiting for people to
start waking up to the fact
that, yeah, you have
electric current in your body
and you have a magnetic
field around you.
And that when we work
in this magnetic field,
that's when the magic
can really happen.
>> Everything is in
a state of vibration.
Everything is in
a state of motion.
Everything is sound.
This includes our body.
Every organ, every
bone, every tissue,
every part of our body
is in a state of motion,
is in a state of vibration.
And when we are in
a state of health,
we say we are in sound health.
It's wonderful.
We're this incredible
orchestra that's
playing the symphony of the
self in a natural harmonic
resonant frequency.
But what happens if the second
violin player loses their sheet
music?
They begin to play out of tune.
And pretty soon, the entire
orchestra is sounding off.
So one of the basic
ideas of sound to heal
is simply to restore to
the string player who's
lost their sheet music
the correct music,
to basically somehow
encode within the body
the correct resonant frequencies
to have it vibrating back
into a state of health.
>> Tuning forks work with the
physics principles of resonance
and entrainment.
So everything in the
body is in motion.
Everything in
motion makes waves,
and waves propagate
off the body.
So we've all had the experience
of getting a good vibe off
of somebody or a bad
vibe off of somebody.
And these waves
that come off of us
are a very, very high frequency.
They're very low amplitude.
So we can't really hear them.
And so the tuning fork will
actually resonate and reflect
whatever tonal information it
is encountering that's being
produced by the body.
So early on, I remember my
first experience with this
was with a massage client
who had a sore shoulder.
And when I activated
a tuning fork
and held it over
the sore shoulder,
the tone really changed
and it sounded sharp,
whereas when I was holding
it over the shoulder that
wasn't in pain, it
sounded very neutral.
And so I kept on activating
it and holding it
in the place that sounded sharp.
And after just a little
bit, the tone changed.
It relaxed.
And it started to sound
like the other shoulder.
And when he got up off the
table and he rotated his arm,
he said, oh my, God,
all the pain is gone.
[DING]
So the tuning fork
will initially
resonate with whatever
distortion it's encountering,
and it's usually a consequence
of some kind of tension
in the body.
Very often old trauma
responses are locked as freezes
in our body.
And it's these
patterns of tension
that create
inflammation, basically
a traffic jam of electrical
movement that has become frozen
and isn't able to be
in a state of flow.
So the tuning fork
gently guides the body
into a more coherent expression.
We're basically
self-tuning instruments
that will fix ourselves
when given the opportunity.
And that led to the
discovery of what
I call the biofield anatomy
map and this observation
that the field
around us is actually
where our memories appear
to be stored, and stored
in a very specific fashion.
For example, sadness.
Every time we feel
sad, that record gets
stored off of our left shoulder.
So I was finding people
that were coming in
with left shoulder pain,
left shoulder injuries had
a lot of undigested, unexpressed
sadness in their memory banks,
and that there was
weight to those feelings,
that there was mass there
that was weighing them down.
I discovered that
every person who
came in that had
right hip issues
had a busy mind and a busy
body, and that they were always
in kind of go mode and thinking
about their to-do lists.
It took me a little
while to learn
that that particular
sound is alarm when
it goes really sharp and high.
That low heavy tone,
that's depression.
That when the fork starts
feeling and sounding like it
has a growl in it,
that's the inner critic
or the inner judge.
So the process is really like
dropping a needle on an album
and reading the vibrational
record of a person's life, all
of their experiences.
We put words on everything.
But really, everything is really
a waveform moving through us.
Every emotion is a waveform.
And it's a very pure language
that really all of nature
speaks.
It's something I've
discovered in my research
is that plants and
animals and humans
all speak the same
vibrational language.
>> So because the nature of
reality is actually just energy
vibrating, there are certain
vibratory codes then that are
there for helping human beings
heal the body, heal the mind,
heal the emotions, and
really expand consciousness.
And those vibratory
codes are called mantras.
The mantra comes from a place
that is far beyond the mind.
It's, essentially, a part of
us calling back to ourselves
to be reunited back in that most
fundamental vibrational field
where we are without
our programs.
That is a mantra.
It's, essentially, just
a song from the soul
being sung to ourselves
calling us back home.
>> Mantras are literally sacred
sounds that connect us with
certain qualities of divinity.
These mantras were discovered
by rishis, or seers.
They learned it
through experience,
through the actual connection
with these divine vibrations.
They were able to capture what
that vibration was in a sound.
Sometimes these
divine vibrations
are also depicted
in yantra form,
which are geometric
representations
of that particular sound.
So this is just one
tradition in the way
that we've described it.
But there are so
many traditions that
understood the power
of the sacred word
and sacred sound making.
>> I've been in this
field for over 40 years,
and I have worked with all
sorts of amazing healing
instruments-- bowls,
bells, tuning forks, gongs,
all sorts of instruments, all
sorts of scientific instruments
designed to project
frequencies to you.
But the most powerful healing
instrument that I know
is the human voice.
>> And it really links back to
what ancient traditions have
taught us about the power
of sound making and a sense
of really utilizing the power
of sound to connect with
the divine.
We see this, for example,
in mantra meditation
and in bhakti singing, in
traditions like kirtan,
but also devotional
singing in the church.
There's the sense that we
can bring together and cohere
our energy, both by
ourselves and in groups,
to really amplify our
connection with something
greater than ourselves.
>> The last thing you
often feel like doing when
you're depressed is singing.
Although, I will say that when
my mom died-- when I was 25,
she died of a brain tumor.
She died within six
weeks of being diagnosed.
And I was one of
those lucky people
who really had a great mom.
So it was very crushing.
I remember my
heart felt so heavy
that it just wanted to pull
me face down onto the floor
and I just wasn't
going to get up.
And what got me through
that was singing.
There were a few CDs
of songs that move me
and I would sing at the
top of my lungs in the car,
in the shower, in my bedroom.
Just sing.
Just belt it out.
It was moving that
energy through my heart,
through my body, that got
me up and got me to move.
Music is very,
very, very powerful
in its ability to move us.
>> Often, we just
feel shut down.
We can't express
ourselves with our voice.
There are so many practices.
And the first is,
honestly, just sighing.
Coming into the
body and allowing
for a nice release of any
stagnant energy to simply flow.
So we simply take a breath.
[INHALES] Ha!
[EXHALES] And we exhale,
and we allow for that
sound to just travel through
the body and release.
There's so many other ways
that we can make sound, too.
We can simply take a
vowel or a seed mantra
like om or any divine sound--
amen, so many different ones.
>> One of the most important
sounds that we can make--
babies, the elderly--
we make it all the time,
consciously or unconsciously,
and that is the hum.
So I want to tell you
how to consciously hum.
If you're with me, I want you
to just check yourself out
for a moment.
What are you feeling?
So you have your lips closed.
Take a nice deep breath.
[HUMMING]
And now just check yourself
out, being in silence.
See if you notice any
differences in the way
you feel.
I can tell you, myself,
that I'm feeling
a little bit light-headed
and a lot more relaxed.
So when you hum,
there are all sorts
of physiological
benefits that occur,
including reduction of
heart rate and respiration.
Your blood pressure goes down.
You get the release
of melatonin,
which is wonderful for enhancing
sleep and circadian rhythms.
You get the release of oxytocin,
that wonderful feel-good
hormone that occurs.
So it's an incredible
natural pharmaceutical tool
that everybody can use.
>> A lot of people think that
the sound-making is just about
catharsis and release.
But it's not.
It's more than that.
It is a clarifying practice.
It is a cohering practice.
And it's freely
available to all of us.
We know now from the
research that even things
like devotional sound making--
for example, kirtan chanting,
when we compare those
with just listening
to music, can actually
decrease markers of cell aging
and promote health in the body.
>> There are so many benefits
that come from applying
specific sound
frequencies to the body.
This idea that Pythagorus
had stated that music
could be used in
place of medicine.
And after that
amazing experience
that I had in the
Great Pyramid, how
was it that my back was
apparently miraculously healed
within only 20 minutes
of making sound?
So I decided to study the
effects of sound frequencies
and music on human blood.
And it consisted of
very simple experiments.
We would take a test
tube of human blood
in the lab incubator which
has a small speaker in it.
Then, 20 minutes of exposure
of the blood in the music
incubator.
And it was hard to believe the
results that we were seeing.
Every type of music,
every genre of music
that we played to the blood
produced a massive increase
in the viability of
the red blood cells.
It was really astonishing.
The blood was being
super oxygenated.
And then when we know
that almost every healing
mechanism in the body
is supported by oxygen,
so it becomes obvious that
it's a very, very important
discovery that we've made.
And obviously it's one
of the many mechanisms
that we now know is at work
in terms of health benefits
when we are immersed
in a sound environment.
Particularly, the
low frequencies
can be readily
absorbed by our bodies,
and therefore, have positive
effects not only on our blood,
but also on many other
aspects of our physiology.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[HUMMING]
>> And so providing a
low frequency environment
for anyone who has perhaps a
weak heart or poor respiration
and not getting enough
oxygen into their body,
that low frequency sound can
actually counter that very,
very easily.
So all these people
who are saying they've
had wonderful experiences
in gong baths,
for example, or
Tibetan bowl baths,
or crystal bowl baths,
these are real effects.
They're real medical effects
and they can be measured.
So the future, I believe, is
very bright for sound therapy
and for music medicine.
>> It is really important that
you do this on a regular basis.
Whatever you are working
with, the effects
of the sound that you're
working with become cumulative.
So if it's a little bit one day,
it becomes more the next day.
It becomes more and more
profound and powerful.
In fact, it can become magical.
>> And you don't even need a
PhD or an MD to do this sound
healing with others, right?
You can get trained in it.
So it's a way for us to work
with sound and vibration
on the community level to up
level the vibration of healing
in all of us in ways that
actually make a huge difference
for mental health.
>> My name is Lloyd Burrell.
In 2002, I answered a call
on my cell phone and I had
a reaction-- to I didn't
know what at the time--
debilitating symptoms
which lasted for years.
It was just like cell phone
next to my ear, intense pain,
cell phone away, no pain.
And then there was like
medium-term symptoms,
which were headaches,
chronic fatigue.
It got so bad I actually
went to see my doctor.
He did his tests
and stuff, and he
said he could find
nothing wrong with me.
But once I understood that
there was a problem with
electromagnetic fields, because
that's what cell phones emit--
these different frequencies--
that's when I began to
look what I needed to do.
But there was nobody saying,
do this, this, and this,
and you'll be fine.
Otherwise, I would have done it.
There was nobody.
So it was either
the problem doesn't
exist, or, yeah, the
problem exists, but there's
no solution.
So we're in this
electromagnetic world.
We are electromagnetic beings.
And these man-made
electromagnetic
fields impact everybody.
And I've never been one to say,
you know, burn the cell towers.
That's not going to happen.
These things are too useful.
They're too part of our
world now for that to happen.
So we have to go
with the flow on it.
And there's lots of strategies--
simple strategies like
switching off your
Wi-Fi at night--
so how to stop it or mitigate
those adverse frequencies.
And then on the other
hand, it's tapping
into the beneficial energies.
This whole world, which is
this holistic approach, which
acknowledges that we
are energetic beings,
and soon as we acknowledge
that we're an energetic being,
then we're looking for
an energetic solution.
And therefore, to live
well in this world,
be you energy sensitive
or EMF sensitive or not,
we need to have a
certain energy mastery,
and that is the way to health.
I'm an accountant by
training, so I'm actually
quite skeptical about
a lot of things.
I don't believe anybody.
But that search for
solutions carried on
for years and years and years.
And it took me about 10 years
to get the better of this
and say that I'm healed.
So it went from being
a curse to a blessing.
And so it's all
about, as Tesla said,
"If you want to understand
the secrets of the universe,
think in terms of energy,
frequency, vibration,
and therein lies the key."
We are actually kind
of walking antennas.
And we are reacting
to sound a bit
like we are being impacted
by electromagnetic fields,
whether we want to or not.
You get home and
you've had a bad day.
And you put some music on
and you'll get carried away.
>> If we experience music
that really moves us,
that really touches
us emotionally,
then what's happening in
our brain is that we are
automatically going to
be producing dopamine
in the brain.
We will also be
reducing or suppressing
the amount of cortisol
in our bodies.
So in other words, the stress
hormone cortisol is reduced
and the happy hormone dopamine
is massively increased.
And so the music that
we particularly love
has the most beneficial
effect for us.
>> We don't want to get locked
into any one specific frequency
as being the be all and end all
that will work for everyone.
We are all unique
vibratory beings.
Different frequencies can
work for different people.
And back when I was getting
my master's degree from Lesley
University, I had
a pile of papers
about yo high that
were basically
different systems of using
sound and music for healing.
I saw that you
would have Dr. X who
would be using a particular
set of frequencies for an organ
and having great
success and Dr. Y
using a completely different
set of frequencies.
And I realized that they
weren't in agreement.
And I was in a really deep
state of intellectual angst.
I remember sitting there with
my head in my hands going,
how can this be?
How can this be?
And I heard an inner voice,
and the inner voice said,
it is not only the
frequency of the sound
that creates its effect.
It is also the intention of
the person making and receiving
the sound.
And I wrote down these words--
frequency plus intent
equals healing.
I have a couple
of subcorollaries
about that, which
is vocalization
making a sound plus
visualization visualizing
something equals manifestation.
And the other one,
which is basically
even a little quicker, is sound
plus belief equals outcome.
And this is why the majority
of prayers on our planet
are vocalized.
They're chanted,
whispered, spoken or sung.
So that is the idea
of the importance
of intent or intentionality.
Nowadays, you have all
these different books,
whether it's Wayne Dyer doing
"The Power of Intention,"
or Dr. Bruce Lipton and "The
Biology of Belief," or Dr. Joe
Dispenza, "The Power
of the Placebo,"
and Masaru Emoto who did these
brilliant photographs of water
crystals that had
been exposed to not
only different frequencies but
different intentionalities.
And one of my favorite
pictures that he did
was water from the
Fujiwara Dam in Japan.
It was polluted and
it looked like mud.
And then he had a
Buddhist priest chant
what is known as the heart
sutra over it for 20 minutes.
And he rephotographed the water.
And the water looked as pristine
and as perfect as a snowflake.
So water can resonate with all
sorts of different frequencies
and with all sorts
of intentionalities.
How much of our body is water?
A whole lot.
So if we can use
intentionalized sacred sound,
we can shift the vibratory field
of ourselves and of the planet
itself.
>> One of the popular sayings
out there right now is that
your vibe attracts
your experience.
I would make that
even simpler and say,
your vibe is your experience.
That whatever you're vibing,
that's what your experience is.
But a lot of people
have this idea
of when I have that made
or I'm paid off from debt,
then I will feel a certain way.
That's backwards.
You have to generate
the feeling first.
Where we drop the tension,
the resistance, the stories
and thinking that something
out there is going to heal me,
fix me, restore me-- no,
you have to feel it first.
You have to practice it.
And there is a gap
before it actually really
shows up, enough to make people
do that 3 feet from gold thing
and just quit because they
think it's not working.
But if they had just
gone a little further,
the paydirt was about to happen.
We're taught that
seeing is believing.
But what I've really come to
see is that believing is seeing.
So you have to give
it to you first.
You're the only one
who can do that.
And I know in extreme cases
that can be extremely hard.
Now, that's where something
like sound healing
can come in handy.
Because what I do
with biofield tuning,
I help you to release
the tension that's
stopping you from being
able to feel that way.
It's OK to need help.
You can go to a sound bath.
Even just hanging out, listening
to bowls can help you to relax.
You can go to a great concert.
Good live music really
shifts your state.
Anything that you
can do that's going
to help you to relax
the tension that's
holding these
patterns of the story
is going to move you a long
way towards experiencing
a better version of yourself.
>> We're all creative beings.
We're all manifesting
our reality.
And that manifestation
is from your vibration.
It's from what you're emitting.
And sound is perhaps
the easiest way
to change our state of being,
because ultimately it's
about changing your
state of being.
We've got all these different
frequencies, binaural beats
and the solfeggio frequencies,
guided meditations.
So this stuff works.
And there's no time
like the present.
Don't wait for
whatever to happen.
Do it.
Believe it.
All it requires is just
a little bit of effort.
But one of the things
I hear a lot is people
say, I had no choice.
And this is so wrong, because
we've always got a choice.
And some of the
choices are hard.
That's true.
But we've always got a choice.
>> Sometimes we
might wonder, well,
if my thoughts can create things
and my intentions are actually
like sound vibrations
that are creating reality,
then why is it that when I will
something, it doesn't happen,
or when I use these
affirmations, nothing changes.
Well, often, it's because we may
be holding subconscious blocks
in our field, where consciously
in our conscious mind
we're pretty clear
on what we want,
but subconsciously we may
be holding old beliefs
or patterns that prevent
us from really aligning
with that thing.
And a good way of
doing this and really
integrating the subconscious
mind and the energy of desire
is to go back to the feeling and
say, OK, now what if I actually
put myself there?
I am in that house, on
that street, on that beach.
The sun is shining.
I'm looking out in the ocean.
How am I feeling right now?
Because often, what
we're really wanting
is a particular feeling state, a
sense of peace, a sense of joy,
a sense of happiness.
So we want to align ourselves
with that state of being
that we're tuning into.
Again, I bring myself
to that feeling
of contentment and
peace because that
is what will attract the
reality that I'm seeking.
And then be open to how it
actually shows up in your life.
Be curious.
>> The biggest reason why it's
not so simple to just think
yourself into a better space
is that feelings are part
of the equation as well.
So we experience the
electric aspect of ourselves
maybe as more mental,
as more thoughts,
and our emotions
as more magnetic.
But what I find in
most people, as I'm
combing through their
fields and their memories,
is really a kind of
emotional constipation
of all of the different
emotions that they've judged,
that they've resisted,
that they've held in.
A lot of it is sound
that has never come out.
Tears that haven't been shed.
Truth that hasn't been spoken.
Shame that hasn't been felt
and digested and responded to.
So a big part of
my work with tuning
is finding these
emotions that have never
had the opportunity
for that wave to break
and supporting the body
in feeling, and digesting,
and integrating that emotion.
And then that energy
goes back into flow.
>> There's a sound that
people, oftentimes,
don't really look at in terms
of its significance on our life,
and that's the sound that comes
from our subconscious internal
dialogue that is at
play all the time.
And people don't tend
to look at that as sound
because it's not coming
from the outside.
But you're hearing it, right?
And so the majority of
that dialogue is negative
and it's having a negative
impact on our lives.
It is a sound coming from
deep within the mind,
so deep that we call it
the subconscious mind.
And it carries so many of
our programs from childhood.
And so one of the fundamental
goals of human existence
is, essentially,
to stop listening
to those sounds that give us
our programs, the programs that
are harming us, and to tune in
to the sound of who we really
are beyond those programs.
And when we can tune in to
that, it changes everything.
It changes the body.
It changes the mind.
It changes our relationships.
Because sound encodes
human experience.
>> A big part for me of
being a sound healer,
a sound therapist,
a sound researcher,
is paying really close
attention to people's-- the tone
of their voices, the
words that they're saying,
and reflecting back to them how
they are creating their life
with the story that
they're telling.
And so really it is by our word
that we make ourselves sick
or we make ourselves well.
And what comes out of
our mouth, in many cases,
is more important than
what goes into it.
What are you saying
and how are you
using the creative power of
your word to limit yourself,
to trap yourself, to reinforce
a story that isn't working?
There's a quote that I
really love from a fellow
by the name of Charles Capps.
"I have told my people,
they can have what they say,
but my people keep
saying what they have."
And that sums up
an awful lot right
there-- is what are you
speaking into being?
>> There's a deep connection
with the emotion of fear
and what it does
vibrationally for our energy.
Fear is, of course,
a natural emotion,
and there's a reason
why we have it.
It's related to our
instinctual sense of survival.
That's why if we see a giant
saber-toothed tiger baring
its claws at us, we think,
oh, I better do something.
[LAUGHS] I don't
want to get eaten.
Now, unfortunately,
because we're so primed
for fear, what can
happen sometimes
is paradoxically it can
actually limit our life energy.
And unfortunately, we're
bombarded with information
all the time that
triggers our brain
into thinking negatively and
creating negative realities
for ourselves.
And when we continue to
move with a fear response
throughout our life, we're
literally seeing the world
through tunnel vision, right?
That means we don't see all
of the possibilities or even
reality for what it is.
So how do we work with fear?
We honor the vibration
of fear when it comes up,
but then we continue
to ask ourselves,
what am I really afraid of?
And we get down to
the root of what
it is that we're most afraid
of and then we work with it.
And there are many
ways to work with it.
There are energy
psychology practices.
There are more traditional
psychotherapy-type practices.
And sometimes when we dive into
what am I really afraid of,
we realize the
fear is irrational.
And we realize, oh, I don't
need to be afraid of that.
Well, super, now I can
liberate my energy.
I don't need to be
afraid of that thing
because that's not the
reality that I'm going
to be creating for myself.
>> Remember these four
pillars of sound healing.
Everything is vibration.
Intent is powerful.
We are all unique,
vibratory beings.
And the fourth one, which we
talked about a little bit,
is that silence is golden.
I just want you to check
yourself out and be in silence.
Just spend a moment, because
it's really in the silence
that the true power
of the sound occurs.
Silence is the yin
to the yang of sound.
>> There's times where I have
vast moments where I'm not
thinking during my meditation.
There's times where everything
actually is kind of blank.
There's no thought.
It's complete silence.
But I know I still exist,
even in that silence.
>> We're always
back to this being.
We overcomplicate things.
But really all that matters
is the here and now,
being in the moment.
It's an inner journey.
And that's why every
morning, I get up,
and it's like half
an hour, an hour
of energy work-- every morning.
>> There are many ways to access
those vibrations of divinity
that are all around us, and
ultimately, really part of us.
So many forms of devotional
sound making, so many forms
of meditation, of prayer.
The data is very
clear that when we
work with our subtle
vibrations in these ways,
we can foster powerful healing
effects for ourselves--
mind, body, and spirit.
The process then takes us into
a more expanded consciousness
where we may be able
to come into greater
contact with the
all, with the pada,
with the true nature of sound,
which is consciousness itself.
>> When I was first
learning ayurveda,
the hardest concept for me to
understand was, what is ether?
And it wasn't until I
started really studying
the science of sound
that it finally
dawned on me what ether is.
We have this medium
in space that
is filled with this
substance called ether,
or Akash in Sanskrit.
It's this medium that
connects absolutely everything
in the universe.
We are all swimming in it.
We're all connected to it.
And it propagates vibration.
It propagates waves.
It's like the internet
system for the entire cosmos.
And sound is its
language, meaning
if you want to communicate
with everything everywhere,
you do that through vibratory
sound codes that can
be transmitted through ether.
And the people who figured
this out and figured out
how to connect to
that substance and how
to talk in that substance,
we call them enlightened,
or we call them the yogis,
or the saints and siddhas.
And we consider what they were
able to do as supernatural.
It's why science
can't figure it out
because we don't study
science in ether.
They knew how to, essentially,
go in to that space,
connect with everything
everywhere, and then send
a vibratory code.
And that code would come
back and be answered by life.
And that's why it
seemed like a miracle.
It wasn't.
It's just simply the
science of Akash.
And as a physician, if I was
able to somehow teach people
how to connect to that, even
if it was just momentarily--
maybe even for a
few seconds a day--
through their mantra
meditation practice,
how would their life change?
What miracles would
they experience
in terms of their physical
health, their mental health,
and probably most
importantly, our relationships
with each other?
>> And so the ether,
the quintessence is one.
It is the one fabric that
all of life is woven from.
And it's science.
It's a state of matter.
And it is all connected.
And that's been removed
from our cosmological story.
But ultimately,
everything is ether
that is continually
giving rise to creations
and then they dissolve back.
The ether also contains
the geometric patterns
that everything is built on.
Every single atom,
molecule structure
has an underlying geometric
template that is in the ether,
that matter then
attaches itself to.
And so we feel like we're
separate from everything.
We don't realize
that we're woven
from the fabric of the one
and that we're all connected
to everything that is.
>> Many of the ancient
mantras coming from India,
whether they're Sanskrit
or Tamil mantras,
will oftentimes begin
with the sound "om."
It's a sound that is embedded so
deeply within nature that it's
part of the very birthplace,
you could say, of life itself.
So for me, when
I go to the ocean
and I'm just walking by
myself, not speaking,
I can hear the sound "om"
in the waves of the ocean.
And that's why the ocean is my
temple, because it reverberates
that primordial sound of life.
>> So if you like, it is the
sound of nature that we need
to bathe in.
There is a frequency that is a
very important frequency called
the Schumann Resonance.
It is the electromagnetic
field of the Earth.
And one great way of
being, if you like,
resonating in the
field of nature
is simply to take a walk.
We forget to do that.
>> It's often said that
the biggest aura wins.
And the biggest
aura is the Earth.
And so when we come
out into nature,
whether it's with the trees,
with the ocean, with a lake,
and we simply sit in silent
reverence for a moment,
we begin to be informed by
the greater biofield, which
is the Earth herself and
all the creatures around it.
So grounding in
earthing practices
are very, very powerful.
We place our feet, if we
can, barefoot onto the Earth
herself.
Take a moment to breathe
and energetically connect.
This is a very,
very powerful way
to feel and connect
vibrationally with our field
and with everything around us.
>> So when I first became
electrically hypersensitive,
it seemed like a curse, it
seemed like the worst thing
that could happen to me.
I just want to get on with
my life, raise my kids,
go on holiday, have a good
time like everybody else.
But then I realized
over time, wow,
what a beautiful gift this is.
And this sensitivity enables me
to connect to what's important.
It's nature, but it's so
much more than nature.
It's this intelligent
force which
is out there, that's the
best explanation I have,
this universal consciousness.
>> The true sound
of healing is love.
And if there were
an intention that
should be projected
on any sound you make,
whether it is a hum, a mantra,
or a song that you're singing,
it's the energy of
love, the energy
of gratitude and appreciation.
When we begin to breathe
deeply and we feel gratitude
and appreciation, when we
breathe in through our heart--
and a lot of this is due
to the work of Heartmath--
we get a synchronization
of our heart
and our brain, or
heart-brain coherence.
>> Vibration is the
medicine of the future.
And science is
continuously evolving.
60 years ago, if I
told a patient, or even
a fellow scientist, that I think
that our emotions can really
affect our health, our emotions
can affect the progression
of disease and even potentially
the onset of a disease,
I would have been laughed at.
Why?
Because we didn't believe that
the mind and the immune system
were even connected
60 years ago.
My home field of study,
psychoneuroimmunology,
did not even exist.
So we see that as
medicine and science
and scientific
discoveries evolve,
we learn more and more about our
fundamental healing capacities,
because science is a
process of discovery
and sometimes rediscovery.
And I've seen, over the last
several years, a greater
openness to exploring
the nature of vibration
among even some of our
mainstream colleagues.
>> So we're finding all of these
ways that sound is starting
to pop up in medicine.
And what really
surprised me when
I started bringing in mantra
meditation with my patients
was actually just how
receptive they were.
Patients are
desperate to change.
And when you give them a
lifeboat like mantra meditation
that begins to start changing
their experiences of their body
and starts to shift negative
mental patterns that
may have been imprisoning
them for their entire life,
they're committed
to their journey.
And so I'm seeing more and
more of the Eastern traditions
emerging.
But I wouldn't even say that
they're just from the East.
They're really the traditions
around the world that
are associated with a
deeper connection to nature
and a deeper
connection to a broader
spectrum of human being.
And I think they're
emerging out of necessity.
I'm a Western-trained physician.
I know the limits
of my education.
I don't like the fact that I
spent decades studying to not
be able to answer
questions in front of me,
but that is the
reality of today.
As most of the time,
necessity becomes
the mother of invention.
And out of that
necessity, we are finally
starting to embrace some of
the ancient traditions that
give us the wisdom in
how to live in balance--
in balance with our
planet, in balance
with each other, and
most importantly,
in balance with ourselves.
It's the whole reason why I
talk about sound medicine is
because I believe in that
possibility of us living
to our absolute
fullest potential.
>> I think that we
are at a pivotal point
in our evolutionary
development on this planet.
On many levels, it is
very, very problematic
and challenging
because so many people
are divided against each other.
But we need to evolve with
the energy of appreciation,
with the energy of love, with
the energy of compassion.
We have a choice.
We are all unique
vibratory beings.
We are all different.
And yet, we are all one.
This oneness has a name
in the Hindu tradition.
It's called Advaita, which
simply means non-duality.
We don't have to
think the same way.
sound the same way.
We don't have to
talk the same way.
We need to just be at one
with love in our hearts
and basically attuned
to the divine.
>> But we've all been very
programmed for self-loathing.
It's really in everyone.
And it's a big part of what's
wrong with the human family is
that people have internalized
this self-loathing,
and then that kind of spills
out into the world around them.
There's also this
very poisonous story
that most people
have internalized
that they're not worthy.
In fact, what I found,
as a practitioner,
was that the kernel of every
dysfunction that people came in
with was some kind of
story of unworthiness
where they were
blocking the life force
from flowing through
that part of them
because they were in
judgment of their worthiness.
This is something I
call a mind virus.
It isn't even self.
It's a program that's
been put into you
to make you powerless,
to make you feel guilty,
not good enough.
And if we are mentally
abusing ourselves,
then we are mentally
abusing creation.
And we're part of the problem.
You are a drop of God.
You are a drop of light.
You are a drop of Earth.
You are a miracle.
And we also have had at least
five generations of trauma--
wars, and all kinds of stuff
has been happening in the world.
So we have generations of
dysfunctional trauma responses
coming down the line.
And what I'm seeing is that
many people are being called--
I call it the karmic
cleanup crew--
to heal the trauma
within themselves,
within their lineage,
and to begin to emerge into
the potential of their soul
and the potential that this time
that we're in, where there's
so much light and so much
potential for all of us,
to really step into
embodiment and empowerment.
And I think people feel
called along that path.
And I think that sound
is an incredible vehicle
to help us to get there.
>> It does appear worse than
it is because things are coming
to the surface.
They are becoming more visible.
So things need to change.
And change can be uncomfortable.
But it is, by raising the
vibration of humanity,
that we're going
to see the change.
And what's going to
enable us to raise
the vibration of humanity?
It's all of this stuff.
It's all of the sound.
It's reconnecting with who we
really are, with the divine,
with the intelligent
force which is out there.
So this is all part of
a beautiful process.
It is actually a beautiful
time to be alive.
It's an exciting time to be
on planet Earth right now.
And what we need to do
is master our energy,
master our vibration, and
start manifesting this world
that we want to live in.
That is going to vibrate out
and impact everybody else
because we're back to the
all is one, the one is all.
>> The light you
are seeking is you.
And the light that we
all come in with that you
see in baby's eyes and
small children when
they're delighted and
feeling free is very bright.
But what happens to us as we
go through life is we take hits
and we form limiting beliefs.
We lose that light.
It goes dim on us.
We lose ourselves.
All of the things that
you think you want
are already inside of you.
It's just tension, and stories,
and trauma that's in the way.
It's already there.
And so as we shed this
emotional baggage,
as we alchemize this heavy
lead that's in our signals
back into the gold
that we are, then we
experience actual
inner illumination.
>> Healing is not simply
getting rid of a disease.
Healing is ultimately about
reconnecting with the life
force of who we are
and fostering harmony
in mind, body,
spirit so that we can
meet any challenge of the
day and do so with more joy,
grace, and ease.
Healing is coming into harmony--
mind, body, and spirit.
And part of that is accepting
the reality of things
as they are and
then surrendering
to a higher power and
process that guides
our life and our healing.
We can sit in the
not knowing and see
if we can find even a tiny bit
of comfort in the not knowing
and allow ourselves to
trust in the process of how
the divine is guiding our life.
So the path of healing and the
path of spiritual liberation
are truly one and the same.
>> We are life discovering
exploring, playing with itself,
occupying itself with stories.
But ultimately, it all
comes from the one.
The one divides into the many.
The many return back to the one.
>> If the entire world
that we're experiencing is
vibratory, when energy is
vibrating, we have life,
we have what in the Indian
tradition or in the Vedic
tradition is called
Maya, the illusion.
Then sometimes the
question naturally
arises, like, well,
what's the point?
What's the point?
If all of this is
kind of not real,
and our real self is sitting
there quietly in the middle,
what's the point?
And the point is for the purpose
of creation, for the expansion.
>> We are spiritual
interconnected beings having
an earthly experience.
And the research
actually supports
what is true about human
nature, that we are all
deeply connected, that we are
part of the fabric of reality,
that even the
so-called differences
that we see based
on our culture,
our upbringing, the color of
our skin, our preferences,
are all simply part of
this beautiful tapestry
of diversity, of oneness
that weaves us together.
And that is the task at hand
for humanity at this point--
to truly recognize
the interconnectedness
and the oneness of what we are.
>> Each one of us is an artist.
Our life is our masterpiece.
We forget that we
came here to create.
And when we sit in that
silence and at the same time
also embody that life when
it's vibrating and expanding,
that's pure magic.
That was magical
enough for us to say,
I want to go out and play and
I want to be a part of this.
And we've forgotten
that because we
forgot our nature of silence.
[MUSIC PLAYING]